tests/e2e/README.md, before:

- [e2e](#e2e)
  * [Requirements](#requirements)
  * [Tests executed](#tests-executed)
  * [Running using containers](#running-using-containers)
  * [Running using virt](#running-using-virt)
  * [Env variables](#env-variables)
  * [Demo](#demo)

# e2e
`run-test-e2e` executes tests for qm software using [podman quadlet](https://www.redhat.com/sysadmin/quadlet-podman) as platform.
For running the tool is required to run as **root** as the nested containers will need privileges to change limits settings.

Demo:
[![asciicast](https://asciinema.org/a/cwnb6RjckO7vXLUvHpbMA9fAU.svg)](https://asciinema.org/a/cwnb6RjckO7vXLUvHpbMA9fAU)

## Requirements
A recent version of Fedora or CentOS9 with the following packages: bash, selinux and podman. 
Make sure to enable `cgroupv2`.

## Tests executed
The idea behind the test is: create isolated environments using technologies like containers, podman (quadlet), selinux and cgroupv2. On top of that, make sure all systemd services in the nodes are controlled remotely taking advanced of [hirte](https://github.com/containers/hirte/).

## Running using containers
By default the tool will create three containers, `control`, `node1` (both running on the host) and the third container will be running on top of `node1` which is called `qm`. In other words, this will be a **nested container environment**.

In a short description, the container control is the **hirte controller**, `node1` and `qm` are the **hirte agents**. After the three nodes are installed and properly configured will be executed several tests scenarios focused in managing systemd remotely using hirte.

## Running using virt
Not developed yet.

## Env variables
There a few env variables that can be set to change the tool behavior. 
Just call `export VARNAME=foobar` before executing the script.

| Name      | Description |
| ----------- | ----------- |
| NUMBER_OF_NODES      | Increase the number of agent nodes. Useful for scale tests.       |
| NET_INTERFACE_IP_CONTROL   | By default is eth0. Used to collect ip address of controller node        |
| TAG_CONTROL_MACHINE | The control machine tag. Default is control:latest

## Demo
If your browser doesn't support asciinema, here the demo in text:
```
[root@dell730 e2e]# #host
[root@dell730 e2e]# cat /etc/fedora-release
Fedora release 38 (Thirty Eight)
[root@dell730 e2e]# getenforce
Enforcing
[root@dell730 e2e]# ./run-test-e2e
[ INFO  ] Starting setup
[ INFO  ] ==============================
[ INFO  ] Cleaning any previous e2e files

[ INFO  ] Preparing ASIL environment
[ INFO  ] ==============================
[ INFO  ] Creating container control [ASIL mode]
[ INFO  ] Creating stub systemd service: container-safety in container control
[ INFO  ] Creating stub systemd service: container-cruise_control in container control
[ INFO  ] Creating stub systemd service: container-tires in container control
[ INFO  ] Creating stub systemd service: container-breaks in container control

[ INFO  ] Preparing QM environment
[ INFO  ] ==============================
[ INFO  ] Creating container node1 [QM mode]
[ INFO  ] Creating stub systemd service: container-radio in node1 and moving it to container qm inside node1
[ INFO  ] Creating stub systemd service: container-store in node1 and moving it to container qm inside node1
[ INFO  ] Creating stub systemd service: container-stream_audio in node1 and moving it to container qm inside node1
[ INFO  ] Creating stub systemd service: container-maps in node1 and moving it to container qm inside node1

[ INFO  ] Starting tests
[ INFO  ] ==============================
[ INFO  ] Waiting hirte containers be ready...

[ INFO  ] #1- Test scenario: hirte list all units from control to node (vise-versa)
[ INFO  ] Connected to control, listing few systemd units from control
[ INFO  ] Executing: podman exec control hirtectl list-units control | head -5
ID                                                                              |   ACTIVE|      SUB
====================================================================================================
console-getty.service                                                           | inactive|     dead
dev-ttyS7.device                                                                |   active|  plugged
sys-devices-pci0000:00-0000:00:1f.2-ata10-host9-target9:0:0-9:0:0:0-block-sda-sd|   active|  plugged

[ INFO  ] Connected to control, listing few systemd units from node1
[ INFO  ] Executing: podman exec control hirtectl list-units node1 | head -5
ID                                                                              |   ACTIVE|      SUB
====================================================================================================
dracut-shutdown.service                                                         |   active|   exited
systemd-journald.service                                                        |   active|  running
dev-hugepages.mount                                                             |   active|  mounted

[ INFO  ] Connected to control, listing few systemd units from qm.544fac352098
[ INFO  ] Executing: podman exec control hirtectl list-units qm.544fac352098 | head -5
ID                                                                              |   ACTIVE|      SUB
====================================================================================================
systemd-udevd.service                                                           | inactive|     dead
container-stream_audio.service                                                  |   active|  running
var-lib-containers-storage-overlay\x2dcontainers-37579a9bbc96dd7e8c60eae095876a9|   active|  mounted

[ INFO  ] All set!
[root@dell730 e2e]# podman exec node1 podman ps
CONTAINER ID  IMAGE       COMMAND     CREATED         STATUS         PORTS       NAMES
eeed67710d86              /sbin/init  45 seconds ago  Up 44 seconds              qm
[root@dell730 e2e]# podman exec control podman ps
CONTAINER ID  IMAGE                                               COMMAND         CREATED             STATUS             PORTS       NAMES
3b53534dede0  registry.access.redhat.com/ubi8/ubi-minimal:latest  sleep infinity  About a minute ago  Up About a minute              safety
9402e530feb8  registry.access.redhat.com/ubi8/ubi-minimal:latest  sleep infinity  About a minute ago  Up About a minute              cruise_control
07b55cee56fd  registry.access.redhat.com/ubi8/ubi-minimal:latest  sleep infinity  About a minute ago  Up About a minute              tires
27441c8a0fe5  registry.access.redhat.com/ubi8/ubi-minimal:latest  sleep infinity  About a minute ago  Up About a minute              breaks
[root@dell730 e2e]# podman exec node1 podman exec qm podman ps
CONTAINER ID  IMAGE                                               COMMAND         CREATED         STATUS         PORTS       NAMES
faf4da74567d  registry.access.redhat.com/ubi8/ubi-minimal:latest  sleep infinity  43 seconds ago  Up 44 seconds              radio
37579a9bbc96  registry.access.redhat.com/ubi8/ubi-minimal:latest  sleep infinity  41 seconds ago  Up 42 seconds              store
7492e2972bf8  registry.access.redhat.com/ubi8/ubi-minimal:latest  sleep infinity  40 seconds ago  Up 40 seconds              stream_audio
bf87fe122d8c  registry.access.redhat.com/ubi8/ubi-minimal:latest  sleep infinity  38 seconds ago  Up 38 seconds              maps
```

Commit message:

Updating images iptables-services
e2e tests failed consistently on CentosStream9 with errors
Error: netavark: code: 3, msg: modprobe: FATAL: Module ip
ptables v1.8.8 (legacy): can't initialize iptables table

Updating Readme/requirements to consume latest:
podman
hirte

Signed-off-by: Yariv Rachmani <yrachman@redhat.com>

tests/e2e/README.md, after:

- [e2e](#e2e)
  * [Requirements](#requirements)
  * [Tests executed](#tests-executed)
  * [Running using containers](#running-using-containers)
  * [Running using virt](#running-using-virt)
  * [Env variables](#env-variables)
  * [Demo](#demo)

# e2e
`run-test-e2e` executes tests for qm software using [podman quadlet](https://www.redhat.com/sysadmin/quadlet-podman) as platform.
For running the tool is required to run as **root** as the nested containers will need privileges to change limits settings.

Demo:
[![asciicast](https://asciinema.org/a/cwnb6RjckO7vXLUvHpbMA9fAU.svg)](https://asciinema.org/a/cwnb6RjckO7vXLUvHpbMA9fAU)

## Requirements
A recent version of Fedora or CentOS9 with the following packages: bash, selinux and podman. 
Make sure to enable `cgroupv2`.
Enable the following on host machine before installing podman
[hirte_repo](https://github.com/containers/qm/blob/main/tests/e2e/ContainerFile.control#L44-L45)


## Tests executed
The idea behind the test is: create isolated environments using technologies like containers, podman (quadlet), selinux and cgroupv2. On top of that, make sure all systemd services in the nodes are controlled remotely taking advanced of [hirte](https://github.com/containers/hirte/).

## Running using containers
By default the tool will create three containers, `control`, `node1` (both running on the host) and the third container will be running on top of `node1` which is called `qm`. In other words, this will be a **nested container environment**.

In a short description, the container control is the **hirte controller**, `node1` and `qm` are the **hirte agents**. After the three nodes are installed and properly configured will be executed several tests scenarios focused in managing systemd remotely using hirte.

## Running using virt
Not developed yet.

## Env variables
There a few env variables that can be set to change the tool behavior. 
Just call `export VARNAME=foobar` before executing the script.

| Name      | Description |
| ----------- | ----------- |
| NUMBER_OF_NODES      | Increase the number of agent nodes. Useful for scale tests.       |
| NET_INTERFACE_IP_CONTROL   | By default is eth0. Used to collect ip address of controller node        |
| TAG_CONTROL_MACHINE | The control machine tag. Default is control:latest

## Demo
If your browser doesn't support asciinema, here the demo in text:
```
[root@dell730 e2e]# #host
[root@dell730 e2e]# cat /etc/fedora-release
Fedora release 38 (Thirty Eight)
[root@dell730 e2e]# getenforce
Enforcing
[root@dell730 e2e]# ./run-test-e2e
[ INFO  ] Starting setup
[ INFO  ] ==============================
[ INFO  ] Cleaning any previous e2e files

[ INFO  ] Preparing ASIL environment
[ INFO  ] ==============================
[ INFO  ] Creating container control [ASIL mode]
[ INFO  ] Creating stub systemd service: container-safety in container control
[ INFO  ] Creating stub systemd service: container-cruise_control in container control
[ INFO  ] Creating stub systemd service: container-tires in container control
[ INFO  ] Creating stub systemd service: container-breaks in container control

[ INFO  ] Preparing QM environment
[ INFO  ] ==============================
[ INFO  ] Creating container node1 [QM mode]
[ INFO  ] Creating stub systemd service: container-radio in node1 and moving it to container qm inside node1
[ INFO  ] Creating stub systemd service: container-store in node1 and moving it to container qm inside node1
[ INFO  ] Creating stub systemd service: container-stream_audio in node1 and moving it to container qm inside node1
[ INFO  ] Creating stub systemd service: container-maps in node1 and moving it to container qm inside node1

[ INFO  ] Starting tests
[ INFO  ] ==============================
[ INFO  ] Waiting hirte containers be ready...

[ INFO  ] #1- Test scenario: hirte list all units from control to node (vise-versa)
[ INFO  ] Connected to control, listing few systemd units from control
[ INFO  ] Executing: podman exec control hirtectl list-units control | head -5
ID                                                                              |   ACTIVE|      SUB
====================================================================================================
console-getty.service                                                           | inactive|     dead
dev-ttyS7.device                                                                |   active|  plugged
sys-devices-pci0000:00-0000:00:1f.2-ata10-host9-target9:0:0-9:0:0:0-block-sda-sd|   active|  plugged

[ INFO  ] Connected to control, listing few systemd units from node1
[ INFO  ] Executing: podman exec control hirtectl list-units node1 | head -5
ID                                                                              |   ACTIVE|      SUB
====================================================================================================
dracut-shutdown.service                                                         |   active|   exited
systemd-journald.service                                                        |   active|  running
dev-hugepages.mount                                                             |   active|  mounted

[ INFO  ] Connected to control, listing few systemd units from qm.544fac352098
[ INFO  ] Executing: podman exec control hirtectl list-units qm.544fac352098 | head -5
ID                                                                              |   ACTIVE|      SUB
====================================================================================================
systemd-udevd.service                                                           | inactive|     dead
container-stream_audio.service                                                  |   active|  running
var-lib-containers-storage-overlay\x2dcontainers-37579a9bbc96dd7e8c60eae095876a9|   active|  mounted

[ INFO  ] All set!
[root@dell730 e2e]# podman exec node1 podman ps
CONTAINER ID  IMAGE       COMMAND     CREATED         STATUS         PORTS       NAMES
eeed67710d86              /sbin/init  45 seconds ago  Up 44 seconds              qm
[root@dell730 e2e]# podman exec control podman ps
CONTAINER ID  IMAGE                                               COMMAND         CREATED             STATUS             PORTS       NAMES
3b53534dede0  registry.access.redhat.com/ubi8/ubi-minimal:latest  sleep infinity  About a minute ago  Up About a minute              safety
9402e530feb8  registry.access.redhat.com/ubi8/ubi-minimal:latest  sleep infinity  About a minute ago  Up About a minute              cruise_control
07b55cee56fd  registry.access.redhat.com/ubi8/ubi-minimal:latest  sleep infinity  About a minute ago  Up About a minute              tires
27441c8a0fe5  registry.access.redhat.com/ubi8/ubi-minimal:latest  sleep infinity  About a minute ago  Up About a minute              breaks
[root@dell730 e2e]# podman exec node1 podman exec qm podman ps
CONTAINER ID  IMAGE                                               COMMAND         CREATED         STATUS         PORTS       NAMES
faf4da74567d  registry.access.redhat.com/ubi8/ubi-minimal:latest  sleep infinity  43 seconds ago  Up 44 seconds              radio
37579a9bbc96  registry.access.redhat.com/ubi8/ubi-minimal:latest  sleep infinity  41 seconds ago  Up 42 seconds              store
7492e2972bf8  registry.access.redhat.com/ubi8/ubi-minimal:latest  sleep infinity  40 seconds ago  Up 40 seconds              stream_audio
bf87fe122d8c  registry.access.redhat.com/ubi8/ubi-minimal:latest  sleep infinity  38 seconds ago  Up 38 seconds              maps
```
