tools/qmctl/README.md, before:

# QMCTL

QMCTL offers a simple interface to inspect QM container namespaces, monitor cgroups and systemd resources, and run commands inside QM containers

## Usage

Show container information

```bash
./qmctl show                        # Show raw container config
./qmctl show all                    # Show all supported info (except live cgtop)
./qmctl show unix-domain-sockets    # Inspect UNIX domain sockets
./qmctl show shared-memory          # View shared memory segments
./qmctl show namespaces             # View container namespaces
./qmctl show available-devices      # Check configured devices
./qmctl show resources              # Live stream systemd-cgtop
```

Run a command inside the container

```bash
./qmctl exec uname -a
./qmctl exec ls /dev --json
```

Run a command inside a nested container in QM

```bash
./qmctl execin alpine uname -a
./qmctl execin alpine ls /dev --json
```

With verbose output

```bash
./qmctl --verbose show
```

Requirements

- Python 3.6+
- Podman installed and configured
- Optional: argcomplete for tab completion

To enable autocompletion:

```bash
pip install argcomplete
activate-global-python-argcomplete --user
```

Commit message:

Add copy feature for qmctl
Closes https://github.com/containers/qm/issues/803
Signed-off-by: Artiom Divak <adivak@redhat.com>

tools/qmctl/README.md, after:

# QMCTL

QMCTL offers a simple interface to inspect QM container namespaces, monitor cgroups and systemd resources, and run commands inside QM containers

## Usage

Show container information

```bash
./qmctl show                        # Show raw container config
./qmctl show all                    # Show all supported info (except live cgtop)
./qmctl show unix-domain-sockets    # Inspect UNIX domain sockets
./qmctl show shared-memory          # View shared memory segments
./qmctl show namespaces             # View container namespaces
./qmctl show available-devices      # Check configured devices
./qmctl show resources              # Live stream systemd-cgtop
```

Run a command inside the container

```bash
./qmctl exec uname -a
./qmctl exec ls /dev --json
```

Run a command inside a nested container in QM

```bash
./qmctl execin alpine uname -a
./qmctl execin alpine ls /dev --json
```

Copy files to and from QM

```bash
./qmctl cp README.md qm:/tmp
./qmctl cp qm:/tmp/README.md ./
```

With verbose output

```bash
./qmctl --verbose show
```

Requirements

- Python 3.6+
- Podman installed and configured
- Optional: argcomplete for tab completion

To enable autocompletion:

```bash
pip install argcomplete
activate-global-python-argcomplete --user
```
